# 0.5M EDTA Preparation Instructions

**Designed following [this guide](https://toptipbio.com/0-5m-edta-ph-8-0-recipe/#:~:text=Ethylenediaminetetraacetic%20acid%20(EDTA)%20solution%2C,DNA%20and%20RNA%20from%20degradation).**

This protocol outlines how to make EDTA buffer, commonly used in CTAB lysis buffer, TE buffer (for DNA elution), and TAE buffer (for gel electrophoresis).

---

## What you’ll need:

•	A glass bottle to store your tris buffer long-term  
•	A weigh boat and spatula for measuring powdered reagent  
•	A graduated cylinder for measuring liquid reagent  
•	A flask or beaker for mixing the buffer  
•	An additional flask or beaker for preparing NaOH solution  
•	A plastic pipette for base additions during titration  
•	Powdered EDTA  
•	NaOH 
•	Access to DI water 
•	Access to a stir plate 

---

## Instructions

### Prior to Making the Buffer

1.	For your EDTA buffer, measure out 18.61g of EDTA and 100mL of DI water  
2.	In your additional flask/beaker, prepare 1M NaOH solution by mixing 4g of NaOH pellets with 25mL of DI water (or use already prepared NaOH solution).
3.	Standardize the pH meter 
    a.	Plug the power cable into the meter to turn it on  
    b.	There will be three colored beakers near the meter with refill bottles behind them. These beakers contain pH standard for pH 4.0, 7.0, and 10.0 You will need to standardize the meter at EACH LEVEL  
    c.	Remove the probe from the electrolyte buffer and dry it off gently on a paper towel.  
    d.	In the top right of the pH meter, press the standardize button. In the upper middle press the button for 4.0, 7.0 or 10.0, depending on which standard you are doing. A number pad will pop up asking you to enter the specified pH, just repeat the number you are standardizing (4.0 for 4.0, 7.0 for 7.0, etc).  
    e.	Insert the probe into the standard for your chosen pH.  
    f.	Once the meter’s reading stabilizes at the specified probe, press the confirm button in the top right and remove the probe from the standard.  
    g.	Dry the meter off and repeat for the remaining standards  

---

### Making the Buffer

1.	Add 18.61g of EDTA and 80mL of water to your chosen mixing vessel, add a stir bar, and turn on the stirring. **THE SOLUTION WILL NOT FULLY DISSOLVE UNTIL YOU REACH 8.0 PH**  
2.	Begin slowly adding NaOH solution using the plastic pipette, testing pH frequently.  
3.	As you get closer to 8.0 pH, the solution will repeatedly fluctuate up and down. The pH will reach 8.0, allowing some of the EDTA to dissolve, lowering the pH below 8.0 again.  
4.	Continue **SLOWLY** adding NaOH solution until the solution is fully dissolved and stablized at 8.0 pH.  
5.	If the total volume is below 100mL, top up with DI water to 100mL  
6.	Store buffer in a glass bottle, label and date.  
7.	Autoclave buffer before usage.  
